Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane. Harry Harrison is one of the pioneers of
adventure science fiction. His Deathworld trilogy, written in the 1960s, is a
prime example. Recently, Harrison completed another adventure series entitled To
the Stars, a trilogy comprising Homeworld, Wheelworld, and Starworld. In
Homeworld, we find a 500-year distant Britain under the heels of a strong
government. In Wheelworld, we find a planet whose harsh conditions are
reminiscent of earlier Harrison novels. In the final novel, Starworld, we find
America 500 years from now. As it turns out, Harrison wrote the middle
installment, Wheelworld, first. The trilogy came about through the inability I
have just to take the situation as set. I know where I got the idea from when I
was in California on the freeway with my friend Brian Aldis. We were in a
horrible little English Sprite, which is just about 8 inches high and 2 feet
wide. It goes a maximum of 50 miles an hour. And we're trundling along five-lane
freeway, California 5. Great big articulated trucks with trails going by with 14
-foot high wheels. I'm looking at the bottom of hubcaps, you know, trying to
keep this thing going straight. God, I had a vision at that point of a world
where trucks ran forever, on and on and on, around the whole planet. How do we
do that? So I had to develop a whole planet and a culture to get them there. And
by the time I'd done it and written the book, the editor said, I feel it's
incomplete. How did I get there in the first place? And what happened to that
revolution afterwards? And I said, you're right. I've got so much plotting in
here. I have a whole book before and a book afterwards. So I took the character.
He'd ride this planet for nameless reasons. And it ended up with a revolution,
which was going wrong. So I went back and told you how he got there, which took
an earth. And I closed the book together in the final one. They came out
different. The one middle one was written first. They had to be different
aspects, you know. Then the third one, of course, put the first two together.
Harrison was able to assemble a number of his plot devices in this series. And
there was a message, as is usual, for Harrison. I used different things at
different times in there. High technology and enjoyment of technology and a
little bit of politics. And the first one in some ways is like make room, make
room. It's where we're going to go if we don't get a hold of technology and what
we can do. If you notice, the first book shows you how rotten Britain will be
500 years from now. The third book, how rotten America will be 500 years from
now. And all done through good intentions with lack of knowledge of how to go
about taking care or helping people. And they're both rotten worlds. So there
again, the admonitory thing is being shaken. No, you must get technologies
involved. You must do somehow, not guess, you must just somehow do a better job
of ruling the world, you know. We're in a technological world and nobody in the
British Parliament or the American Senate or legislation knows anything about
science. I mean, we, a bunch of ex-lawyers and politicians. Politicians have
one, one motivation in life, that's to get re-elected. Look at the whole Nixon
trouble came about because all he wanted to do was be re-elected and doesn't
care what you do. And that's the wrong thing. I'm not saying, I can't see any
easy answers to it. I'm just saying that there are answers. We are now at
technological evolution. We now are going into the computer world. And no one
has consistently thought what will happen to most people. And in a way, behind
all the adventure stories there is a consideration of those problems. Harrison
told us that the grim future depicted in the To the Stars trilogy has its roots
in Orwell's 1984. The first book, plot-wise and character-wise, is a tip of the
hat, a nod of the head, to George Orwell's 1984. I even used the word pints,
leaders for pint in there, his thing, they were drinking leaders instead of
pints. I used the word prose. I put the clues in there for you to find. And the
brother-in-law character is the same torturer character from Brian O'Brien. O
'Brien was the other fellow. It is the man who knows he's evil and is in charge
of an evil society. And that's why he's in the first book. But having not killed
him off in the first, he has to appear again. And then you get what I thought
was the only truthful ending, an ambiguous ending to the third one. People hate
me for it. What happened? I said, that's what life is. Fiction gives you easy
answers, but in real life there are no easy answers, you know. We'll have more
with Harry Harrison on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and Bill Vernon. Science fiction author Harry Harrison writes
many styles of science fiction. One of these is adventure science fiction. Here
he tells us how he came to write Planet of No Return, the sequel to an earlier
effort, Planet of the Damned. The exorcist of publishing produced strange
offspring. I wrote Planet of the Damned years ago. In a way, it's Deathworld
one more time, with slight differences. I wrote Deathworld five or six times,
one guy to another, until I decided to break out and do build a galactic hero.
And I did that. It was completely into itself. And then a few years ago, a
publisher was doing these illustrated books, which really are just juveniles.
That's what they are. They're really short novels with pictures in them for
kids. And unlike most science fiction writers, I ran out of money at the time.
And he said, Harry, are you doing illustrated books for me? I said, no. He said,
we'll give you an X number of $1,000. And I said, yes. And I shopped around my
older books. And so I could do a sequel, a fast-paced adventure book, with a
little content as well. A little bit about women's rights in there, if you look
closely at the end. You know, they're all male fascist swine, these guys. They
love to kill each other. And a little bit of plot, mystery plot. An option for a
film to make a nice, fast film. You know, it was not a bad book. It's a
juvenile, done for a certain market. Not ashamed of it or proud of it. Just a
book I did, and there it is. Humor is another Harrison trademark. The
Technicolor Time Machine is a vintage Harrison humor novel. Yet when he began
it, Harrison intended for it to be quite serious. In The Technicolor Time
Machine, I implied this is a very, very serious book. Time travel. And when I
got this paparazzo Italian camera and back facing this great big nine-foot-tall
Viking, I started to laugh. And it came out funny. But if you look, there's a
very solid time travel plot, which could be a serious book. Except I started
laughing. And I'm laughing. Why shouldn't the readers laugh? And the way the
thing went, it took off that way. And I think it had that serious structure
beneath it. But Star Smashers of the Galaxy Rangers, on the other hand, was
intended to be funny from the start. A Star Smashers of the Galaxy Rangers was
just, I was feeling a deadly mood one day, and I was so tired of rubbish. I was
so tired of, you know, dear old Doc Smith wrote his space operas back in the 30s
and 40s. That's a long time ago. And it's a period form of art I think is dead.
But I keep seeing certain writers who shall be nameless rehashing old space
operas. I said, oh, I had enough of this. So I said, why not just put the boot
to all the space operas at one time, have fun doing it. And I made internal
parodies of everyone I could think of. People accuse me of hating Doc Smith. I
say, no, I don't like it. I love Doc Smith. I grew up reading Doc Smith. But I
just don't, I think I feel it's dead. I'd like to put a tombstone over it. Not
that you ever can in fiction. They're still going on doing it anyway. But I
enjoy myself. The readers enjoy it. Some, I mean, the two kind of readers. Some
say, you're hating Doc Smith. You know, they chase me around. Others say, oh, I
feel a chair. You know, so there it is. It takes your choice. One of Harrison's
latest novels is actually science fiction, but it's being marketed as a
mainstream book. Rebel in Time was a definite attempt to, between myself and the
publisher, I had the idea. I saw the idea as being something that a non-science
fiction reader would buy. Science fiction sells 20% of all fiction in the United
States in paperback, which is not bad. But being a writer, I see 80% more I
could sell. And publishers like to sell more, too. So we talked about the novel.
I said it's pure science fiction, but it starts out as a mystery novel. And it's
a good quarter of the way into it before the science fiction element is brought
in. And it's a science fiction element that the reader will accept, any general
reader. And by that time, he's trapped. 10, 20 years ago, I couldn't have done
that because I had no big name. And then the readers would not have bought it.
Now, I have enough readers around. They'll see it, my name on it. They'll look
at it, open it, maybe buy it. The science fiction readers. So I don't think
we'll lose one science fiction reader by packaging it that way. We might pick up
a lot of other readers, which would make me happy, my publisher happy, my wife
happy, my children, my bank manager. You know, all the things we want to make
happy. We'll talk with Harry Harrison about short stories on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon. And Daryl Lane. Although science fiction author Harry
Harrison is noted for his many fine novels, he's an accomplished short story
writer as well. He gave us some thoughts on short stories. In science fiction,
unlike a lot of other fiction, there are people who write both short stories and
novels. Some of them can, but a lot of them can. And very simply, it is least
residual. A short story is a one-idea story. A single gimmick or device, a turn
of plot, and you write that to length and stop it at two or three or four or
five thousand words. If it's complicated, it goes to ten thousand novelettes. As
opposed to a novel, which is a complex thought that requires modifications, more
than one idea, ramifications, and then it goes to novel length. And many times I
first started writing, I had these short story ideas. And they're very good to
do. They go in the magazines, they go in anthologies, readers recognize your
name. And deliberately, between novels, we do a half dozen short stories.
Unhappily, after a number of years of writing, you find publishers want to give
you more money for novels. And they really do, the word rate per word in a novel
is about ten times a short story. And I find myself tending to cook one novel at
the end of the other. I've written a short story in three or four or five years,
which I think is a shame, because I have four collections of short stories out,
all selling quite nicely, and they've anthologized in about 22 languages. One of
Harrison's best-known short stories is Rescue Operation. It tells about an alien
that crash lands in Yugoslavia and of the alien's fate in the hands of an
ignorant, superstitious priest. Harrison's travels in Yugoslavia inspired this
story. Rescue Operation came out, everything in there I know except the alien.
In Yugoslavia, the most broken-down country in Western Europe, they have
peasants there, which are much more broken down than German peasants. They have
deeply religious, simple-mindedly stupid, people-burning peasants within ten
miles of a nuclear reactor. The perfect analog of our world. Instead of northern
civilized countries, southern poor, uncivilized countries, all in one country.
And having been in the middle of this and having had a number of desperately
awful things happen to me and my family down there, the children got scarlet
fever, had injections with blunt needles, had to carry them screaming, you know,
sort of thing. And living in that desperate, awful world, and there again, the
background was there. And then the thought, instead of arriving in Central Park
in front of the White House, what if the alien from space arrived there? Voila,
you know, complete. Just a matter of writing it.
Another well-known Harrison short story is Mute Milton, the story of a black man
whose bus stops in a small southern town a few years ago. This moving, gut
-wrenching story was inspired by an incident in Harrison's life. Harrison's
anger, which comes across clearly in the story, was genuine. Living in
Scandinavia, been out of the States two or three or four years, and the Danes
are absolutely colorblind. That, in fact, in those days, really, certain kind of
girls only date black men. Other girls used to look down upon them. There were
about four black men in the whole country, you know. And, you know, it's very
easy to be pro-race, anti-racial, if you're in a country with no race problems.
But living there, children growing up there, and Martin Luther King was shot,
and a newspaper called me and asked me my opinion on it, you know, and they were
all horrified. And then I picked a copy of Newsweek up, and they had some great
big-bellied Alabama. I photographed him with a shotgun in one hand, a nose
-picker in the other, and his belly hanging over his belt, you know, saying,
well, just one more nigga to me. And I just, my white heat engulfed my mind. You
know, one of America's, he got the Nobel Prize a little earlier than that. You
know, one of America's, well, I was very proud when he came over there. I was in
Scandinavia, hit an American getting a prize for doing something really good in
the world, being honored for it. And I saw red, and the idea came to me, you
know, the story just began to put into a story that rage I had, that strong
feeling. And if a writer can do that, well, then you're a successful story.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane, A regional science fiction anthology:
what in the world is that? Well, it's a collection of
science fiction stories written by folks from a particular area of the country.
Ah, you mean like New York, where science fiction really started, or like
California, where all the writers live? Well, yes, but try Texas, because that's
where the first one came out. The first regional science fiction anthology was
Lone Star Universe, and it was billed as speculative fiction and fantasy by
Texans. Oh, that's the book edited by George Proctor and Stephen Utley that came
out in 1976. It's that collection of 17 short stories written by Texans. Right.
We got to talk to George Proctor, and we asked him how the book came about.
Well, one day, a bunch of us who had just made their first sales were sitting
around laughingly, saying, yeah, one day there's going to be enough writers in
Texas that we can put out our own anthology, and to hell with all these people
that will buy our stories. And as it was, I think that was Howard Waldrop was
there, Stephen Utley, Buddy Saunders, and we're just sitting around joking,
putting a fanzine together.
And I guess I was the only person that really sort of took it seriously.
And as it was, Steve and I put a proposal together and sent it first to a man
out in Midland, Odessa, whose name escapes me now, but he was doing Texana-type
books. And he came back and liked the idea but wasn't going to pick it up and
suggested we send it to Heidelberg Press in Austin. And we did, and they picked
it up. And by that time, there were enough known writers in Texas and award
winners that it really did seem feasible and seemed like a good idea.
And it got put together. Sort of interesting. It makes for a lot of jokes, you
know, regional science fiction. But our thought was, you know, Texana's in, and
here's this whole realm that's never been really looked at. And what's funny is
it sparked a lot of other regional science fiction books. It was the first. And
everybody chuckled and laughed. And then there was about five that came out on
its heels because it had never been thought of. And what was funny is that I
meet new editors in New York. They know my name, The Lone Star Universe, rather
than some of the novels I've done, which is surprising. But again, New York is
surprised by new ideas. And that's, I think, the reason it was noticed.
Hey, I know a lot about science fiction, and I have this vast collection of
science fiction books. Well, maybe it's only half vast. But anyway, I've never
seen a copy of The Lone Star Universe, let alone heard of it. What gives?
There's a good reason for that. Proctor told us that the book received only
limited distribution. Heidelberg stopped publishing, as best I can tell, just
about the time they brought out the book. There were big plans to do posters and
everything to go with the book. You know, full posters of the cover, which the
cover is gorgeous. It's one of those double-take covers. And as it was, they
sort of went out of business about that time. And as far as I know, only a few
thousand were distributed, and they're still sitting in a warehouse somewhere,
making scarce items.
It's surprising that you go to conventions, large conventions in and out of
state, and there will always be several people asking me how you get a copy of
the book. It's rare because it was not distributed. And there's apparently tons
of the books still around. You just can't get a hold of them. It's a nice item
to have for a collector. Well, you can bet I'm going to be on the lookout for
that book. In the meantime, we'll have more about Lone Star Universe on our next
show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and Bill Vernon. Last time we talked about Lone Star
Universe, the first regional science fiction anthology. Edited by George Proctor
and Stephen Utley, Lone Star Universe is a collection of short stories written
by Texans. The anthology is a sought-after collector's item. It's not readily
available because it was poorly distributed when it was published in 1976. We
talked with one of the editors, George Proctor, and we asked him if the book
might someday be reprinted, perhaps as a paperback. I don't think so, because I
think it's a limited item to Texana. I really think it has more value as Texana
than it does to the science fiction field as a whole. Those science fiction
collectors want it because it is a first.
The stories are good. I think there's a wide variety of stories. Science fiction
reviews that I saw of it, their complaint was that there was a wide variety of
stories in there, that it wasn't all nuts and bolts, and it wasn't all new way,
but there was everything. And that's, the whole idea of the book was to show the
diversity of the science fiction writers in this state. I think it did that
well. I think it produced good stories by everybody that was in there. Proctor
told us that editing a second volume of Lone Star Universe is not out of the
question.
There may or may not be. It depends on, you know, I know of one person now who
is editor for a Texas publisher, and he has mentioned in passing that he'd like
to get a hold of the first book, since it never was really distributed, is maybe
buy them all out if possible. Whether or not that will ever happen is something
else, but yeah, why not? It was fun. The people who got it seemed to enjoy it,
and I still think if it would get some sort of distribution, it would be a money
-making book in Texas.
Just the charisma
of the state and the chauvinistic attitude of Texans, which is equivalent to New
York, we're just larger. We buy Texana. Whether we read it or not, we buy it,
and I think there's a market for it.
So Proctor feels that Lone Star Universe might be more in demand as a
collector's item for collectors of Texana than as reading material for science
fiction readers. We ask him why Texas seems to be spawning so many new science
fiction writers. They've always been around. They've never been noted as Texan
before. I think early 70s to mid-70s, we had a lot of fans who turned
professional, started selling their stories. They were friends from all over the
state. They suddenly became a very large group that were selling and were
noticeable.
That this group was here, had made it, gave a lot of other folks who wanted to
write incentive to do it. And you've got suddenly a whole second wave of Texas
writers coming out, meeting them here for the first time, that have just begun
to sell their first stories or their first novel, but you've suddenly got a
second wave of Texas science fiction writers, which is kind of nice. Texas
writers have been rearing their heads recently, and Lone Star Universe is an
excellent anthology of their work. Other regions are producing a lot of science
fiction these days, notably Oregon, Florida, upstate New York, and New Orleans.
But it was the Texans, with their bigger-than-life state and their pride, who
produced the first regional anthology.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.